---------------------------------------
Analyzing mixed populations with breseq
---------------------------------------

:Author: Jeff Barrick
:Date: June 8, 2010

Finally, here's some real data. This is 68 different lambda phage
genomes that were sequenced as a mixture. It illustrates some of the
data quality issues and difficulties one might encounter trying to
estimate mutation frequencies in a mixed population. ::

  %% breseq --polymorphism-prediction -r lambda.gbk -o breseq lambda_mixed_population.fastq

The --polymorphism-prediction flag tells _breseq_ to look for
polymorphisms. The green highlighted lines are predicted mutations
with a frequency that is statistically distinguishable from 0 and
100%. Some predictions have been disqualified because they have read
coverage biased toward one strand. If you click on these, a grey bar
with this information will appear below the "RA" evidence line.

This small dataset has an average coverage of slightly more than
100-fold.

If you're feeling ambitious, you can try running the complete data set
which has an average coverage of ~50,000-fold.  It will probably need
to run overnight, maybe longer; ask Titus if you want access to this.

Other data sets
---------------

You can also try entire bacterial genomes, but -- again -- they will
take a very long time to finish: 12-48 hrs.

1. One suitable data set is an E. coli clone isolated from a
population that evolved for 20,000 generations in the laboratory.  It
has >40 mutations relative to its ancestor. You can download the fastq
from the Short Read Archive here::

   http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/SRX012992?report=full

The references sequence of the ancestor is here::

   http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NC_012967.1

Be sure that you download the "complete record"!

2. Another good data set is gDNA isolated from the mixed *population*
of E. coli that was frozen after 20,000 generations.  The individual
above was picked from this population, so by comparing the results of
sequencing the population to the individual, you can find out which
mutations were present only in the clone's lineage, but at a low
frequency in the population, or that were present at high frequencies
in the population, but absent in the clone. You will want to run
_breseq_ with the --polymorphism-prediction flag.

The data is available here::

   http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/SRX015044?report=full

3. The Campylobacter data set from an earlier tutorial can also be
used. It's from a mixed population, so you might try adding
--polymorphism-prediction to your _breseq_ command for it.
