-----------------------------------------
Finding transposon insertions with breseq
-----------------------------------------

:Author: Jeff Barrick
:Date: June 8, 2010

This tutorial allows you to use some tools from previous days. 

Imagine that we have a reference sequence (the same one again) that we
subjected to a transposon screen to recover mutants that had lost of
your favorite phenotype. Now, you could map these mutations or do
fancy PCR amplifications, but what if you just choose two different
mutants, prepped their gDNA and sequenced to a relatively high depth
with single-end Illumina. We should find reads that overlap the new
junctions and find out what genes were inactivated by transposon
insertions, right? One more complication, your collaborator who sent
you the strains forgot to tell you what transposon they used.

Run _breseq_ on this data set::

  %% breseq -r REL606.20kb_fragment.gbk -o breseq test.fastq

Take a look at the output. We didn't find the transposon? Why?

There is a pile of reads that didn't match the genome stashed away in
one of the _breseq_ directories at
"breseq/05_alignment_correction/test.unmatched.fastq". Try assembling
these reads to find out what else was there besides your reference
genome in the sample, then BLAST whatever contigs you get against the
NCBI database to figure out what the transposon sequence was likely to
be.

Download the GenBank file for the transposon that you found and place
it in the main directory of this tutorial. Name it
"transposon.gbk". (Or you can copy it from the answers directory, but
that's no fun!) Run breseq again, this time with two reference
sequences and a different output directory. ::

   %% breseq -r REL606.20kb_fragment.gbk -r transposon.gbk -o breseq_transposon test.fastq

Look at these results, and hopefully you can figure out where those
transposons are!
