====================================================
Aligning ChIP-seq reads and detecting enriched peaks
====================================================

:Author: Mark Robinson
:Date: June 10, 2010

Introduction
------------

In this tutorial we are going to work through the process of taking a
set of Illumina reads ffrom a ChIP-seq experiment, aligning them to a
reference genome and then identifying peaks of enrichment for ChIP
specific reads. We'll be using Myxococcus xanthus as our reference
genome.  Our ChIP-seq data comes from experiments performed with
antibodies for a transcription factor known to be developmentally
important, MrpC.

Download the data files from the `private data collection <http://teckla.idyll.org/~t/angus-private/#m-xanthus-chip-seq>`__ and gunzip them::

   %% mkdir /mnt/myxo
   %% cd /mnt/myxo
   <curl commands here>
   %% gunzip *.gz

You should now have three files::

   % ls
   M2_pf.fastq  MP1_pf.fastq  myxo-genome.fa


Aligning reads to the reference genome
--------------------------------------

Install bowtie as in :doc:`bowtie-mapping`.

Build your index for the M.xanthus genome::

  %% cd /mnt/myxo
  %% bowtie-build myxo-genome.fa myxo

You should now be ready to run bowtie for each of the two sets of
reads. We'll simply use the default bowtie parameters here (-n 2 -l 28
-e 70) which allows a maximum of 2 mismatches in the first 28 bases of
the read and requires that the sum of the Phred values for the
mismatches positions not exceed 70. These are parameters that you
might want to modify if you find many of your reads are not alignable,
feel free to play! The '-m' switch being set to one ensures that only
uniquely alignable reads will be reported; the default setting would
report one of potentially many, with no guarantee that the reported
alignment was the best.

::

  %% bowtie -p 2 -m 1 myxo MP1_pf.fastq > control.map
  %% bowtie -p 2 -m 1 myxo M2_pf.fastq > chip.map

You should see ::

  # reads processed: 12460030
  # reads with at least one reported alignment: 8902883 (71.45%)
  # reads that failed to align: 3245241 (26.05%)
  # reads with alignments suppressed due to -m: 311906 (2.50%)
  Reported 8902883 alignments to 1 output stream(s)

from the first bowtie, and ::

  # reads processed: 12972579
  # reads with at least one reported alignment: 9625057 (74.20%)
  # reads that failed to align: 3090348 (23.82%)
  # reads with alignments suppressed due to -m: 257174 (1.98%)
  Reported 9625057 alignments to 1 output stream(s)

from the second bowtie.

Peak calling
------------

It's time to take our aligned reads and try and make some sense of them.

Firstly we'll need to install Quest:

Download and unpack the code::

  %% cd
  %% curl -O http://www.stanford.edu/%7evalouev/QuEST/QuEST_2.4.tar.gz
  %% tar -zxf QuEST_2.4.tar.gz
  %% cd QuEST_2.4

Configure the installation parameters for your platform and compile::

  %% perl configure.pl
  %% make

Running QuEST
-------------

Create a genome table::

  %% cd /mnt/myxo
  %% echo chr 9139764 > myxo.gt

and run the analysis::

  %% /root/QuEST_2.4/generate_QuEST_parameters.pl -bowtie_align_ChIP chip.map -bowtie_align_RX_noIP control.map -gt ./myxo.gt -ap ./QuEST_analysis -ChIP_name MrpC

You should now see some activity as QuEST validates your input and
attempts to convert your alignments to its own internal format.
Eventually you will be prompted with a summary of your data.

Press "y" to continue.

Again, after some further activity you will be prompted to select
appropriate running parameters. In this case, we will select the
default parameters suggested for TF data.

Press 1 and Enter

You'll now be asked to select some stringency measures. For our first
run through we'll select option 1 for the most stringent criteria
(Note for the record I believe even the relaxed criteria generate high
quality peak calls, just lots more of them!), again feel free to
repeat and experiment with the consequences of these choices.

Press 1 and Enter

There will be one final prompt asking if you want to go ahead with
your selected options...

Press 'y' to continue

In a few moments (thank god for small genomes!) QuEST should have
completed, leaving you with lots of juicy files full of output.

Exploring the output
--------------------

To see the summary of the analysis::

  %% less ./QuEST_analysis/module_outputs/QuEST.out

To view individual peak and region summaries complete with genome
coordinates and associated statistics::

  %% less ./QuEST_analysis/calls/peak_caller.ChIP.out.accepted

These files are information rich and will form the starting point for
much of your analysis from this point on.

Region fields:

1. R - <region number>

2. chromosome

3. region_begin-region_end (e.g 47556767-47557549)

4. ChIP: maximum ChIP unnormalized score within this region (e.g. 54.5)

5. control: control unnormalized score at the position within the
   region with the highest ChIP score(e.g. 0.29)

6. max_pos: position within the region with the maximum score (e.g.47557145)

7. ef: Normalized enrichment fold at the maximum position within the
   region based on the score ratio (e.g. 309.574)

8. ChIP_tags: Number of sequence reads in the ChIP data that fell
   within this region (e.g. 7071)

9. background tags: Number of sequence tags from the background data
   that fell within this region ( e.g. 69)

10. tag_ef: Normalized enrichment fold based on the tag counts within
    the region (e.g. 112.346)

11. ps: Peak shift metric within the region. Expected to be about half
    the library fragment size (e.g. 61 bp)

12. cor: Correlation between density profiles on + and - strand at the
    distance given by the region peak shift (e.g. 0.385673)

13. -log10_qv: Negative log base 10 of q-value obtained by Bonferroni
    correction of tag enrichment p-value (e.g. 3.90558e+06)

14. qv_rank: Rank of q-value of this region compared to other regions (e.g. 3)

Peak fields:

1. P-<region_number>-<peak number within the region> (e.g. P-2-1)

2. chromosome

3. peak coordinate

4. ChIP: Un-normalized ChIP score at the position of the peak (e.g. 54.5)

5. control: Unnormalized background score at the position of the ChIP
   peak (e.g. 0.19)

6. region: <containing region coordinate begin>-<containing region   
   coordinate end> (e.g. 47556767-47557549) 

7. ef: normalized enrichment fold calculated from ration of ChIP and
   control scores (309.574)

8. ps: peak shift metric for the peak. Expected to be about half the
   library size (e.g. 52 bps)

9. cor: Correlation between opposite strand enrichment profiles at the
   distance given by the peak shift above (e.g. 0.981378 )

10. -log10_qv: Negative log base 10 of the peak q-value obtained by    
    Bonferroni correction of peak score p-value (e.g. 3.64579e+06)   

11. qv_rank: q-value based rank of the peak (e.g. 2)

Visualizing ChIP-Seq data with UCSC Genome Browser
--------------------------------------------------

QuEST also generates a number of pre-formatted tracks that can be
uploaded and visualised in a genome browser, such as the UCSC genome
browser.

To view them, find and view the reference genome of interest in the
genome browser. In this case we'll want to use the archaea and
bacterial version of the UCSC genome browser at

   http://archaea.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgTracks?clade=bacteria-deltaproteobacteria&org=Myxococcus+xanthus+DK+1622

First, copy all the files to a common location::

   %% mkdir /mnt/quest-data
   %% cp QuEST_analysis/tracks/wig_profiles/by_chr/background_unnormalized/chr.wig.gz QuEST_analysis/tracks/data_bed_files/by_chr/RX_noIP/RX_noIP.chr.bed.gz QuEST_analysis/tracks/ChIP_calls.filtered.bed QuEST_analysis/tracks/data_bed_files/by_chr/ChIP/MrpC.chr.bed.gz QuEST_analysis/tracks/bed_graph/MrpC.bedGraph.gz /mnt/quest-data

Now, download all these files to your local computer.

Go to the Web site,

   http://archaea.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgTracks?clade=bacteria-deltaproteobacteria&org=Myxococcus+xanthus+DK+1622

Then:

 - click on "manage custom tracks" button underneath the main browser display   
 - click on "add custom tracks" button

 - add the QuEST calls track::

       ChIP_calls.filtered.bed

 - add the sequence read data track::

       ChIP/MrpC.chr.bed.gz

 - add the sequence read bedgraph display::

       MrpC.bedGraph.gz

 - you should now see all these tracks being uploaded into the browser:

 - click on the "go to the genome browser" button and navigate to a
   locus of interest. Here you can search for specific coordinates, spans
   of coordinates or gene names.

To see a more condensed view of the data disable the raw data display
by choosing the "hide" option of the MrpC" track in the section under
the main browser display area. hit "refresh" button:

Add control data to the display

  - click on "manage custom tracks" button underneath the main browser display

  - click on "add custom tracks" button in the "manage custom tracks" display page

  - Upload control data for chr11: select file::
    
        RX_noIP.chr.bed.gz

    click "Open" then "Submit" button (see the screen shot below)

  - Upload control data density track: click on "add custom tracks",  
    select file::

        chr.wig.gz

    hit "Open" and "Submit" button (see the screen shot below)    

Refresh to see the new tracks displayed.

.. You can also take a look at the data by giving the UCSC genome browser a
.. direct link to your serve
